websocket.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: WebSocket Tutorial
---

The complete Python source code for this example can be found here: [https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy](https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy).

---

One of the key features of EpiViz is allowing users to plug in new data on the fly, using
[Data Provider plugins]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins.html#new-data-provider-plugin). One powerful such plugin is the **WebSocket data
provider**. This data provider offers an interface between EpiViz and any programming environment that supports
[WebSocket](http://www.websocket.org/) connections. In R there is already [a Bioconductor library](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epivizr.html)
that supports communication with EpiViz through WebSockets, called [Epivizr](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epivizr.html).

In this tutorial, we go over the essentials of creating a new WebSocket endpoint for EpiViz. We choose [Python](https://www.python.org/)
as an example programming environment, to emphasize the flexibility and power of the EpiViz framework. We create a
simple program with the same functionality as ```epiviz.plugins.data.MyDataProvider```, from the [Data Provider Plugin Tutorial]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins.html#new-data-provider-plugin).


## To connect to EpiViz using the WebSocket API

To connect to the EpiViz WebSocket API, you need a programming environment that supports the WebSocket protocol (like R,
Python, Java EE, etc). In R, you can use the [Epivizr Bioconductor package](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epivizr.html).
For this demo, we create an example in Python (source code available [here](https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy)). The
same functionality can be replicated in any other language as long as the API is respected.


1. In Python, one library that provides access to the WebSocket protocol is [tornado](http://www.tornadoweb.org/en/stable/).
First we implement a subclass of `tornado.websocket.WebSocketHandler`.

  **Example**

  ```python
  import simplejson
  import tornado.websocket

  class EpiVizPyEndpoint(tornado.websocket.WebSocketHandler):

      def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
          super(EpiVizPyEndpoint, self).__init__(*args, **kwargs)

      def open(self):
          print 'new connection'

      def on_message(self, json_message):
          print 'message received %s' % json_message
          message = simplejson.loads(json_message)

      def on_close(self):
          print 'connection closed'
  ```

2. Create a class that can parse request strings (this is optional, but will make our work a lot easier). As described
in the [Data Provider Plugin Tutorial]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins.html#new-data-provider-plugin), there are two types of request
actions in EpiViz: **Server Actions** and **UI Actions**.

  **Example**

  ```python
  from enum import Enum

  class Request(object):

      class Action(Enum):
          # Server actions
          GET_ROWS = 'getRows'
          GET_VALUES = 'getValues'
          GET_MEASUREMENTS = 'getMeasurements'
          SEARCH = 'search'
          GET_SEQINFOS = 'getSeqInfos'
          SAVE_WORKSPACE = 'saveWorkspace'
          GET_WORKSPACES = 'getWorkspaces'

          # UI actions
          ADD_MEASUREMENTS = 'addMeasurements'
          REMOVE_MEASUREMENTS = 'removeMeasurements'
          ADD_SEQINFOS = 'addSeqInfos'
          REMOVE_SEQNAMES = 'removeSeqNames'
          ADD_CHART = 'addChart'
          REMOVE_CHART = 'removeChart'
          CLEAR_DATASOURCE_GROUP_CACHE = 'clearDatasourceGroupCache'
          FLUSH_CACHE = 'flushCache'
          NAVIGATE = 'navigate'

      def __init__(self, request_id, args):
          '''
          :param request_id: number
          :param args: map<string, string>
          '''
          self._id = request_id
          self._args = args

      def id(self):
          return self._id

      def get(self, arg):
          if arg in self._args:
              return self._args[arg]

          return None

      @staticmethod
      def from_raw_object(o):
          return Request(o['requestId'], o['data'])
  ```

3. In our `EpivizPyEndpoint` class, create a method to handle the Server actions. And methods for the actions. The
functionality is that for any request, we return a set of blocks of fixed length of `100` at every `1000` base pairs.
The value associated to them is generated randomly between `-5` and `25`.

  **Complete Example**

  ```python
  import simplejson
  import math
  import random

  import tornado.websocket

  from epiviz.websocket.Request import Request
  from epiviz.websocket.Response import Response


  class EpiVizPyEndpoint(tornado.websocket.WebSocketHandler):

      def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
          super(EpiVizPyEndpoint, self).__init__(*args, **kwargs)

          self._mock_measurement = {
            'id': 'py_column',
            'name': 'Python Measurement',
            'type': 'feature',
            'datasourceId': 'py_datasource',
            'datasourceGroup': 'py_datasourcegroup',
            'defaultChartType': 'Line Track',
            'annotation': None,
            'minValue': -5,
            'maxValue': 25,
            'metadata': ['py_metadata']
          }

      def open(self):
          print 'new connection'

      def on_message(self, json_message):
          print 'message received %s' % json_message
          message = simplejson.loads(json_message)

          if message['type'] == 'request':
              request = Request.from_raw_object(message)
              self._handle_request(request)

      def on_close(self):
          print 'connection closed'

      def _handle_request(self, request):
          action = request.get('action')

          # switch(action)
          response = {
              Request.Action.GET_MEASUREMENTS: lambda: self._get_measurements(request.id()),
              Request.Action.GET_ROWS: lambda: self._get_rows(request.id(), request.get('datasource'), request.get('chr'), request.get('start'), request.get('end'), request.get('metadata')),
              Request.Action.GET_VALUES: lambda: self._get_values(request.id(), request.get('measurement'), request.get('datasource'), request.get('chr'), request.get('start'), request.get('end')),
              Request.Action.GET_SEQINFOS: lambda: self._get_seqinfos(request.id()),
              Request.Action.SEARCH: lambda: self._search(request.id(), request.get('q'), request.get('maxResults'))
          }[action]()


          message = response.to_json()
          print 'response %s' % message
          self.write_message(message)

      # Request handlers

      def _get_measurements(self, request_id):
          '''
          Returns Response
          '''
          return Response(request_id, {
            'id': [self._mock_measurement['id']],
            'name': [self._mock_measurement['name']],
            'type': [self._mock_measurement['type']],
            'datasourceId': [self._mock_measurement['datasourceId']],
            'datasourceGroup': [self._mock_measurement['datasourceGroup']],
            'defaultChartType': [self._mock_measurement['defaultChartType']],
            'annotation': [self._mock_measurement['annotation']],
            'minValue': [self._mock_measurement['minValue']],
            'maxValue': [self._mock_measurement['maxValue']],
            'metadata': [self._mock_measurement['metadata']]
          })

      def _get_rows(self, request_id, datasource, seq_name, start, end, metadata):
          '''
          :param datasource: string
          :param seq_name: string
          :param start: number
          :param end: number
          :param metadata: string[] A list of column names for which to retrieve the values
          Returns response
          '''
          # Return a genomic range of 100 base pairs every 1000 base pairs
          step, width = 1000, 100

          globalStartIndex = math.floor((start - 1) / step) + 1
          firstStart = globalStartIndex * step + 1
          firstEnd = firstStart + width

          if firstEnd < start:
              firstStart += step
              firstEnd += step

          if firstStart >= end:
              # Nothing to return
              return Response(request_id, {
                'values': { 'id': [], 'start': [], 'end': [], 'strand': [], 'metadata': { 'py_metadata': [] } },
                'globalStartIndex': None,
                'useOffset': False
              })

          ids = []
          starts = []
          ends = []
          strands = '*'
          py_metadata = []

          globalIndex = globalStartIndex
          s = firstStart

          while s < end:
              ids.append(globalIndex)
              starts.append(s)
              ends.append(s + width)
              py_metadata.append(self._random_str(5)) # Random string
              globalIndex += 1
              s += step

          return Response(request_id, {
            'values': { 'id': ids, 'start': starts, 'end': ends, 'strand': strands, 'metadata':{ 'py_metadata': py_metadata } },
            'globalStartIndex': globalStartIndex,
            'useOffset': False
          })

      def _get_values(self, request_id, measurement, datasource, seq_name, start, end):
          '''
          :param measurement: string, column name in the datasource that contains requested values
          :param datasource: string
          :param seq_name: string
          :param start: number
          :param end: number
          Returns response
          '''
          # Return a genomic range of 100 base pairs every 1000 base pairs
          step, width = 1000, 100

          globalStartIndex = math.floor((start - 1) / step) + 1
          firstStart = globalStartIndex * step + 1
          firstEnd = firstStart + width

          if firstEnd < start:
              firstStart += step
              firstEnd += step

          if firstStart >= end:
              # Nothing to return
              return Response(request_id, {
                'values': [],
                'globalStartIndex': None,
              })

          values = []
          globalIndex = globalStartIndex
          s = firstStart
          m = self._mock_measurement
          while s < end:
              v = random.random() * (m['maxValue'] - m['minValue']) + m['minValue']
              values.append(v)
              globalIndex += 1
              s += step

          return Response(request_id, {
            'values': values,
            'globalStartIndex': globalStartIndex
          })

      def _get_seqinfos(self, request_id):
          '''
          Returns response
          '''
          return Response(request_id, [['chr1', 1, 248956422], ['pyChr', 1, 1000000000]])

      def _search(self, request_id, query, max_results):
          '''
          :param query: string
          :param max_results: number
          Returns response
          '''
          return Response(request_id, [])


      def _random_str(self, size):
          chars = '0123456789abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ'
          result = ''

          for _ in range(size):
              result += chars[random.randint(0, len(chars) - 1)]

          return result
  ```

4. Create a class that instantiates the WebSocket endpoint in another thread so the main thread is kept unblocked.

  **Example**

  ```python
  import threading

  import tornado.httpserver
  import tornado.ioloop
  import tornado.web

  from epiviz.websocket.EpiVizPyEndpoint import EpiVizPyEndpoint


  class EpiVizPy(object):
      def __init__(self, server_path=r'/ws'):
          self._thread = None
          self._server = None
          self._application = tornado.web.Application([(server_path, EpiVizPyEndpoint)])

      def start(self, port=8888):
          self.stop()
          self._thread = threading.Thread(target=lambda: self._listen(port)).start()

      def stop(self):
          if self._server != None:
              tornado.ioloop.IOLoop.instance().stop()
              self._server = None
              self._thread = None

      def _listen(self, port):
          self._server = tornado.httpserver.HTTPServer(self._application)
          self._server.listen(port)
          tornado.ioloop.IOLoop.instance().start()
  ```

5. Finally create a main program that runs the whole thing.

   **Example**

   ```python
   from sys import stdin

   from epiviz.websocket.EpiVizPy import EpiVizPy

   if __name__ == '__main__':
       epivizpy = EpiVizPy()
       epivizpy.start()

       print 'press enter to stop'
       userinput = stdin.readline()
       epivizpy.stop()
       print 'stopped'
   ```

6. Run it, and open an EpiViz instance, using the URL argument `websocket-host[]=ws://localhost:8888/ws`: [{{ site.epivizUiMain }}?websocket-host[]=ws://localhost:8888/ws]({{ site.epivizUiMain }}?websocket-host[]=ws://localhost:8888/ws).

  **Python console**

  ![Python console]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/pydev_console_websocket_connection.png)

  **New measurement in menus**

  ![New measurements in menus]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/scr_pywebsocket_add_linetrack.png)

  **Different charts showing the measurement defined in Python**

  ![Different charts showing the measurement defined in Python]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/scr_pywebsocket_heatmap.png)

  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/scr_pywebsocket_line_blocks.png" style="max-width: 100%" />

---

The complete Python source code for this example can be found here: [https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy](https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy).

Commit message:

add posts about edit code feature and clustering; change EpiViz to Epiviz; add site icon

websocket.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: WebSocket Tutorial
---

The complete Python source code for this example can be found here: [https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy](https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy).

---

One of the key features of Epiviz is allowing users to plug in new data on the fly, using
[Data Provider plugins]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins.html#new-data-provider-plugin). One powerful such plugin is the **WebSocket data
provider**. This data provider offers an interface between Epiviz and any programming environment that supports
[WebSocket](http://www.websocket.org/) connections. In R there is already [a Bioconductor library](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epivizr.html)
that supports communication with Epiviz through WebSockets, called [Epivizr](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epivizr.html).

In this tutorial, we go over the essentials of creating a new WebSocket endpoint for Epiviz. We choose [Python](https://www.python.org/)
as an example programming environment, to emphasize the flexibility and power of the Epiviz framework. We create a
simple program with the same functionality as ```epiviz.plugins.data.MyDataProvider```, from the [Data Provider Plugin Tutorial]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins.html#new-data-provider-plugin).


## To connect to Epiviz using the WebSocket API

To connect to the Epiviz WebSocket API, you need a programming environment that supports the WebSocket protocol (like R,
Python, Java EE, etc). In R, you can use the [Epivizr Bioconductor package](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epivizr.html).
For this demo, we create an example in Python (source code available [here](https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy)). The
same functionality can be replicated in any other language as long as the API is respected.


1. In Python, one library that provides access to the WebSocket protocol is [tornado](http://www.tornadoweb.org/en/stable/).
First we implement a subclass of `tornado.websocket.WebSocketHandler`.

  **Example**

  ```python
  import simplejson
  import tornado.websocket

  class EpiVizPyEndpoint(tornado.websocket.WebSocketHandler):

      def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
          super(EpiVizPyEndpoint, self).__init__(*args, **kwargs)

      def open(self):
          print 'new connection'

      def on_message(self, json_message):
          print 'message received %s' % json_message
          message = simplejson.loads(json_message)

      def on_close(self):
          print 'connection closed'
  ```

2. Create a class that can parse request strings (this is optional, but will make our work a lot easier). As described
in the [Data Provider Plugin Tutorial]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins.html#new-data-provider-plugin), there are two types of request
actions in Epiviz: **Server Actions** and **UI Actions**.

  **Example**

  ```python
  from enum import Enum

  class Request(object):

      class Action(Enum):
          # Server actions
          GET_ROWS = 'getRows'
          GET_VALUES = 'getValues'
          GET_MEASUREMENTS = 'getMeasurements'
          SEARCH = 'search'
          GET_SEQINFOS = 'getSeqInfos'
          SAVE_WORKSPACE = 'saveWorkspace'
          GET_WORKSPACES = 'getWorkspaces'

          # UI actions
          ADD_MEASUREMENTS = 'addMeasurements'
          REMOVE_MEASUREMENTS = 'removeMeasurements'
          ADD_SEQINFOS = 'addSeqInfos'
          REMOVE_SEQNAMES = 'removeSeqNames'
          ADD_CHART = 'addChart'
          REMOVE_CHART = 'removeChart'
          CLEAR_DATASOURCE_GROUP_CACHE = 'clearDatasourceGroupCache'
          FLUSH_CACHE = 'flushCache'
          NAVIGATE = 'navigate'

      def __init__(self, request_id, args):
          '''
          :param request_id: number
          :param args: map<string, string>
          '''
          self._id = request_id
          self._args = args

      def id(self):
          return self._id

      def get(self, arg):
          if arg in self._args:
              return self._args[arg]

          return None

      @staticmethod
      def from_raw_object(o):
          return Request(o['requestId'], o['data'])
  ```

3. In our `EpivizPyEndpoint` class, create a method to handle the Server actions. And methods for the actions. The
functionality is that for any request, we return a set of blocks of fixed length of `100` at every `1000` base pairs.
The value associated to them is generated randomly between `-5` and `25`.

  **Complete Example**

  ```python
  import simplejson
  import math
  import random

  import tornado.websocket

  from epiviz.websocket.Request import Request
  from epiviz.websocket.Response import Response


  class EpiVizPyEndpoint(tornado.websocket.WebSocketHandler):

      def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
          super(EpiVizPyEndpoint, self).__init__(*args, **kwargs)

          self._mock_measurement = {
            'id': 'py_column',
            'name': 'Python Measurement',
            'type': 'feature',
            'datasourceId': 'py_datasource',
            'datasourceGroup': 'py_datasourcegroup',
            'defaultChartType': 'Line Track',
            'annotation': None,
            'minValue': -5,
            'maxValue': 25,
            'metadata': ['py_metadata']
          }

      def open(self):
          print 'new connection'

      def on_message(self, json_message):
          print 'message received %s' % json_message
          message = simplejson.loads(json_message)

          if message['type'] == 'request':
              request = Request.from_raw_object(message)
              self._handle_request(request)

      def on_close(self):
          print 'connection closed'

      def _handle_request(self, request):
          action = request.get('action')

          # switch(action)
          response = {
              Request.Action.GET_MEASUREMENTS: lambda: self._get_measurements(request.id()),
              Request.Action.GET_ROWS: lambda: self._get_rows(request.id(), request.get('datasource'), request.get('chr'), request.get('start'), request.get('end'), request.get('metadata')),
              Request.Action.GET_VALUES: lambda: self._get_values(request.id(), request.get('measurement'), request.get('datasource'), request.get('chr'), request.get('start'), request.get('end')),
              Request.Action.GET_SEQINFOS: lambda: self._get_seqinfos(request.id()),
              Request.Action.SEARCH: lambda: self._search(request.id(), request.get('q'), request.get('maxResults'))
          }[action]()


          message = response.to_json()
          print 'response %s' % message
          self.write_message(message)

      # Request handlers

      def _get_measurements(self, request_id):
          '''
          Returns Response
          '''
          return Response(request_id, {
            'id': [self._mock_measurement['id']],
            'name': [self._mock_measurement['name']],
            'type': [self._mock_measurement['type']],
            'datasourceId': [self._mock_measurement['datasourceId']],
            'datasourceGroup': [self._mock_measurement['datasourceGroup']],
            'defaultChartType': [self._mock_measurement['defaultChartType']],
            'annotation': [self._mock_measurement['annotation']],
            'minValue': [self._mock_measurement['minValue']],
            'maxValue': [self._mock_measurement['maxValue']],
            'metadata': [self._mock_measurement['metadata']]
          })

      def _get_rows(self, request_id, datasource, seq_name, start, end, metadata):
          '''
          :param datasource: string
          :param seq_name: string
          :param start: number
          :param end: number
          :param metadata: string[] A list of column names for which to retrieve the values
          Returns response
          '''
          # Return a genomic range of 100 base pairs every 1000 base pairs
          step, width = 1000, 100

          globalStartIndex = math.floor((start - 1) / step) + 1
          firstStart = globalStartIndex * step + 1
          firstEnd = firstStart + width

          if firstEnd < start:
              firstStart += step
              firstEnd += step

          if firstStart >= end:
              # Nothing to return
              return Response(request_id, {
                'values': { 'id': [], 'start': [], 'end': [], 'strand': [], 'metadata': { 'py_metadata': [] } },
                'globalStartIndex': None,
                'useOffset': False
              })

          ids = []
          starts = []
          ends = []
          strands = '*'
          py_metadata = []

          globalIndex = globalStartIndex
          s = firstStart

          while s < end:
              ids.append(globalIndex)
              starts.append(s)
              ends.append(s + width)
              py_metadata.append(self._random_str(5)) # Random string
              globalIndex += 1
              s += step

          return Response(request_id, {
            'values': { 'id': ids, 'start': starts, 'end': ends, 'strand': strands, 'metadata':{ 'py_metadata': py_metadata } },
            'globalStartIndex': globalStartIndex,
            'useOffset': False
          })

      def _get_values(self, request_id, measurement, datasource, seq_name, start, end):
          '''
          :param measurement: string, column name in the datasource that contains requested values
          :param datasource: string
          :param seq_name: string
          :param start: number
          :param end: number
          Returns response
          '''
          # Return a genomic range of 100 base pairs every 1000 base pairs
          step, width = 1000, 100

          globalStartIndex = math.floor((start - 1) / step) + 1
          firstStart = globalStartIndex * step + 1
          firstEnd = firstStart + width

          if firstEnd < start:
              firstStart += step
              firstEnd += step

          if firstStart >= end:
              # Nothing to return
              return Response(request_id, {
                'values': [],
                'globalStartIndex': None,
              })

          values = []
          globalIndex = globalStartIndex
          s = firstStart
          m = self._mock_measurement
          while s < end:
              v = random.random() * (m['maxValue'] - m['minValue']) + m['minValue']
              values.append(v)
              globalIndex += 1
              s += step

          return Response(request_id, {
            'values': values,
            'globalStartIndex': globalStartIndex
          })

      def _get_seqinfos(self, request_id):
          '''
          Returns response
          '''
          return Response(request_id, [['chr1', 1, 248956422], ['pyChr', 1, 1000000000]])

      def _search(self, request_id, query, max_results):
          '''
          :param query: string
          :param max_results: number
          Returns response
          '''
          return Response(request_id, [])


      def _random_str(self, size):
          chars = '0123456789abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ'
          result = ''

          for _ in range(size):
              result += chars[random.randint(0, len(chars) - 1)]

          return result
  ```

4. Create a class that instantiates the WebSocket endpoint in another thread so the main thread is kept unblocked.

  **Example**

  ```python
  import threading

  import tornado.httpserver
  import tornado.ioloop
  import tornado.web

  from epiviz.websocket.EpiVizPyEndpoint import EpiVizPyEndpoint


  class EpiVizPy(object):
      def __init__(self, server_path=r'/ws'):
          self._thread = None
          self._server = None
          self._application = tornado.web.Application([(server_path, EpiVizPyEndpoint)])

      def start(self, port=8888):
          self.stop()
          self._thread = threading.Thread(target=lambda: self._listen(port)).start()

      def stop(self):
          if self._server != None:
              tornado.ioloop.IOLoop.instance().stop()
              self._server = None
              self._thread = None

      def _listen(self, port):
          self._server = tornado.httpserver.HTTPServer(self._application)
          self._server.listen(port)
          tornado.ioloop.IOLoop.instance().start()
  ```

5. Finally create a main program that runs the whole thing.

   **Example**

   ```python
   from sys import stdin

   from epiviz.websocket.EpiVizPy import EpiVizPy

   if __name__ == '__main__':
       epivizpy = EpiVizPy()
       epivizpy.start()

       print 'press enter to stop'
       userinput = stdin.readline()
       epivizpy.stop()
       print 'stopped'
   ```

6. Run it, and open an EpiViz instance, using the URL argument `websocket-host[]=ws://localhost:8888/ws`: [{{ site.epivizUiMain }}?websocket-host[]=ws://localhost:8888/ws]({{ site.epivizUiMain }}?websocket-host[]=ws://localhost:8888/ws).

  **Python console**

  ![Python console]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/pydev_console_websocket_connection.png)

  **New measurement in menus**

  ![New measurements in menus]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/scr_pywebsocket_add_linetrack.png)

  **Different charts showing the measurement defined in Python**

  ![Different charts showing the measurement defined in Python]({{ site.baseurl }}/img/scr_pywebsocket_heatmap.png)

  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/scr_pywebsocket_line_blocks.png" style="max-width: 100%" />

---

The complete Python source code for this example can be found here: [https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy](https://github.com/epiviz/epivizpy).
